Chemical selectivity is traditionally understood in the context of rigid molecular scaffolds with precisely defined local coordination and chemical environments that ultimately facilitate a given transformation of interest. By contrast, nature leverages dynamic structures and strong coupling to enable specific interactions with target species in otherwise complex media. Taking inspiration from nature, we demonstrate unconventional selectivity in the solvent extraction of light over heavy lanthanides using a conformationally flexible ligand called octadecyl acyclopa (ODA). This novel ligand forms pseudocyclic molecular complexes with lanthanide ions at organic/aqueous interfaces, revealed by vibrational sum frequency generation spectroscopy. These complexes are extracted into the organic phase, where femtosecond structural dynamics are probed by two-dimensional infrared spectroscopy and ab initio molecular dynamics simulations to mechanistically frame the macroscopic selectivity trends. We find larger-than-expected structural fluctuations and bond lengths for heavy Ln–ODA complexes that arise from an inability of ODA to contort around the smaller ions to satisfy all would-be bonding interactions, despite forming some individually strong bonds. This finding contrasts with the binding of ODA with lighter lanthanides where, despite individually weaker bonds, collective interactions manifest that minimize structural fluctuations and give rise to enhanced thermodynamic stability. These results point to a new paradigm where conformational dynamics and cumulative bonding interactions can be used to facilitate unconventional chemical transformations.

The demand for lanthanides (Ln), comprising the 15 elements La through Lu, has skyrocketed over the last several decades due to their utility in modern technology (1−5) and medicine. (6−8) They can be found, for example, in batteries and high-performance magnets used in clean energy and national security applications, in phosphors for lighted displays, and even in many approved and investigational (radio)pharmaceutical agents for diagnosis and treatment of cancer and other diseases. Leveraging the distinctive properties of Ln in these applications requires not only the ability to extract a sufficient supply from dilute, complex sources, but also a means to further separate them from each other. This separation, however, is notoriously challenging because their chemical properties in aqueous solution are very similar. (9) A commonly exploited characteristic used to separate Ln3+ ions is their larger-than-expected decrease in ionic radius with increasing atomic number, a trend known as the lanthanide contraction. (10,11) This phenomenon renders the smaller, heavier Ln more densely charged than the larger, lighter Ln, consequently increasing the strength of their ionic bonding interactions with chelating ligands. Accordingly, smaller Ln generally form more stable coordination complexes than their larger congeners, driving conventional trends in selectivity for various separation schemes across the series. (12−14) Although useful, this selectivity pattern for small over large Ln limits the development of separations targeting certain elements from mixtures that may be of higher value or exist in lower abundance. Given the diversity of feedstock in lanthanide separations, there is motivation to develop new chelators capable of bucking convention.

Toward this goal, research efforts have focused largely on incorporating coordinating functional groups into preorganized molecular backbones to enable unconventional selectivity via well-defined spatial constraints. (15−17) Using this strategy, a few ligands have been reported that reverse the above-mentioned trend in size selectivity. For instance, organic bis-lactam phenanthroline and phenanthroline-dicarboxamide ligands have been shown to extract large over small Ln3+ ions from aqueous solution in solvent extraction-based separations. (18−20) This preference can be extended to aqueous soluble derivatives (21) and has been attributed to their highly rigid structures, which give rise to binding pockets with larger “bite sizes” that favor larger ions. Another well-known class of reverse-size-selective chelators comprises diaza-18-crown-6 macrocycles. (22−25) These preorganized 18-membered macrocycles provide an expanded binding pocket that enables a size-specific interaction of lighter, larger Ln3+ ions, and thus a means to tune selectivity based on complementarity. (26) One of the most striking examples of large-Ln selectivity in this class is provided by macropa (H2bp18c6), a bis-picolinate macrocycle that exhibits nearly 7 orders of magnitude higher affinity for La3+ over Lu3+ in aqueous solution (Scheme 1). (27−29) From this molecule, several derivatives have been synthesized to tune the selectivity and efficiency of separations, (30−34) including one reported recently that exhibits unprecedented dual-size selectivity. (35) Although both classes of ligands are powerful additions to the arsenal of extractants and complexants for Ln separations, their syntheses are oftentimes expensive and complex. As such, it can be challenging to adapt them to new separations or targeted extractions.

Scheme 1. Design Strategy for the Flexible Octadecyl Acyclopa (ODA) Extractant Based on the Rigid Aqueous Complexant Macropaa

aOne of the C–C bonds in the diaza-18-crown-6 backbone of macropa is cleaved and two C18 alkyl chains are installed, affording ODA as a linear, lipophilic analog. Upon binding Ln3+ ions, ODA adopts a pseudocyclic structural arrangement.

In stark contrast to the conformationally rigid ligands being developed under the current paradigm, conformationally flexible ones are generally considered incapable of showing reverse (or any unconventional) Ln selectivity. (16) Taking cues from nature (3,36) and the concept of induced-fit recognition, (37,38) flexible ligands should be able to contort to accommodate a variety of ionic radii such that the charge density of the heavier Ln, which drives the formation of stronger bonds, should dominate selectivity trends. However, biological systems leverage conformational flexibility to enhance selectivity by efficiently dispersing excess energy away from binding sites via coupling to low energy vibrational modes in the outer sphere. (39−41) In this regard, there is an opportunity to design molecules capable of new function that balance inner sphere with outer sphere interactions to strongly bind and efficiently stabilize recognition complexes in new ways. The question is thus, can we design flexible ligands capable of providing unconventional size selectivity in Ln separation schemes?

To answer this question, we prepared a flexible amphiphilic ligand, coined octadecyl acyclopa (ODA), that features a diaza polyethylene glycol podand appended with two chelating picolinic acid pendants and two octadecyl end-cap groups (Scheme 1). This molecule is derived from the cyclic macropa chelator described above, in which a single bond has been “cut”, thus unraveling the macrocycle into a linear analog. Extraction experiments show that despite the loss of conformational rigidity afforded by the macrocyclic backbone of macropa, the linear ODA extractant is capable of preferentially stabilizing lighter Ln3+ ions versus the heavier species, in contrast to the conventional view of lanthanide coordination chemistry. Surface-specific vibrational sum frequency generation (SFG) spectroscopy shows that ODA arranges at organic/aqueous interfaces to form pseudocyclic structures, analogous to macropa, that are transported to the organic phase on extraction. The interfacial structures are found to be independent of the specific Ln3+ ions, indicating that the stabilization is realized thermodynamically. This finding is supported by ultrafast two-dimensional infrared spectroscopy (2D IR), density functional theory (DFT) calculations, and ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) simulations that connect conformational dynamics, binding energies, and strain to selectivity. These results show that the reverse-size selectivity arises from the inability of the flexible ligand to adopt the optimal geometry needed to effectively coordinate the heavier, smaller, lanthanides, despite the ability to form individually stronger bonding interactions. We also show that for molecules of this size, energy dissipation to outer-sphere constituents plays a secondary role to the number and strength of inner-sphere coordination interactions. These results point to a new paradigm in ligand design where conformational flexibility is embraced with an eye toward engineering collective interactions in Ln3+ coordination.

The novel extractant octadecyl acyclopa (ODA) was prepared over five steps, as shown in Scheme 2. In the first step, 1,2-bis(2-iodoethoxy)ethane (1) was treated with two equiv N-benzylethanolamine in a straightforward N-alkylation reaction to form the benzyl protected core acyclic scaffold, 2. Next, the hydroxy groups of compound 2 were deprotonated using NaH in THF, and lipophilic C18 “tails” were installed via O-alkylation with 1-bromooctadecane to afford compound 3. The benzyl groups of 3 were removed with H2 over Pd/C catalyst, forming 4, and then the amino nitrogen atoms of 4 were alkylated with methyl-(6-bromomethyl)picolinate to install the picolinic acid pendent arms. Finally, acid hydrolysis of the picolinate esters yielded the pure ligand as a white solid. The final product and the intermediates were analyzed by nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, high-resolution mass spectrometry (HRMS), and analytical high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) techniques to ensure the identity and purity of ODA (see Figures S1–S15 in the Supporting Information). We note that although a relatively low global yield of 16% was obtained for ODA, the synthesis did not require the demanding high dilution conditions and templating typically needed for forming macrocycles. (42) It also allows for the modular installation of a range of pendent arms and tails in future design iterations. We anticipate that yields can be improved henceforth by omitting the benzyl protection step and forming the acyclic diaza-crown-6 scaffold directly. (43)

To evaluate the Ln selectivity preferences of ODA as a conformationally flexible ligand, extraction experiments were carried out on a mixture of Ln3+ ions in a biphasic system comprising pH 4 lactate buffer and 1,1,2,2-tetrachloroethane (TCE). Details of the experimental setup can be found in Section 1.3 in the Supporting Information. Once equilibrium was reached (Figures S16 and S17), the concentration of each Ln3+ ion remaining in the aqueous phase was measured using inductively coupled plasma–mass spectrometry (ICP–MS). The Ln3+ distribution ratio (DM), a measure of the partitioning of ions between the organic and aqueous phases, was subsequently obtained by mass balance (Table S1). Studies were limited to La–Tm due to the extremely low extraction of the heavier Ln3+ ions into the organic phase, which precluded the accurate determination of Yb and Lu distribution between the phases under the conditions used. With DM values in hand, slope analysis was performed by plotting log DM vs log ODA concentration (0.5–12 mM) to assess the stoichiometry of extracted complexes. These plots (Figure S18 and Table S2) yielded a linear trend with a slope of ∼1 across the series, suggesting that ODA forms mononuclear complexes with both large and small Ln3+ ions. To account for the variation in ODA concentration between samples, the DM values were normalized, as discussed in Section S1.3, to determine conditional extraction constants (Kex), which can be directly compared across the series.

The results in Figure 1A show that ODA facilities the preferential partitioning of light Ln3+ to the organic phase from the aqueous phase, and therefore retains the reverse-size-selectivity pattern of the parent macrocycle. The highest Kex values for extraction by ODA are observed for La3+, Ce3+, Pr3+, and Nd3+, with peak selectivity at Pr3+. With decreasing ionic radius from these light Ln3+ ions to Tm3+, Kex values decrease dramatically, signifying that Ln–ODA complexes are progressively destabilized across the series. Notably, this general selectivity pattern mirrors that of macropa in aqueous solution based on experimentally determined stability constants (log KML values). (27) From the ratio of Kex values, separation factors [SF = Kex(Ln1)/Kex(Ln2)] of adjacent pairs of Ln3+ ions were calculated (Figure 1B and Table S3). SFs ranged from 0.7 for the La/Ce pair to 4.4 for the Dy/Ho pair and tended to be greater for the mid-to-late Ln. Thus, ODA more effectively discriminates between the later Ln than between the earlier Ln, consistent with the steep decline in Kex values across the series after Nd3+. This decrease gives rise to a SF of 6600 for the largest/smallest Ln pair studied, La3+ and Tm3+, which is among the highest translanthanide separation factors reported to date for a reverse-size selective extractant. (18,44) A high SF of 215 was also achieved for the Nd/Dy pair, two Ln3+ ions whose separation is crucial in the context of recovering Ln from secondary sources such as magnet waste. (45,46) Collectively, these results reveal ODA’s potential as a promising new extractant for unconventional Ln separations and warrant further studies in the future to optimize extraction conditions.

Figure 1. Extraction of Ln3+ ions from pH 4 lactate buffer by ODA in TCE. (A) Plot showing conditional extraction coefficients, Kex, as a function of Ln3+ ionic radius. Error bars are not visible because the uncertainty is smaller than the symbols in the plot. Standard deviations are instead provided in the Supporting Information (Table S3). (B) Separation factors of adjacent Ln3+ pairs obtained from ODA solvent extraction experiments.

Having established the reverse-size binding preferences of ODA, we next sought to understand the molecular origins of its selectivity. As a first step, we employed vibrational sum frequency generation (SFG) spectroscopy, a nonlinear surface-specific spectroscopy capable of structurally characterizing species at buried interfaces. (47) Since extracted species are formed at and traverse the organic/aqueous interface in a separation, the molecular assemblies located there at equilibrium inform on the structural motifs adopted during solvent extraction. (48,49) SFG spectra of ODA at an interface of n-hexane and pH 4 lactate buffer were acquired in the absence and presence of La3+, Gd3+, and Lu3+ and are plotted in Figure 2A in the SSP polarization combination, which preferentially probes symmetric stretches pointed out of the interfacial plane. (50) La, Gd, and Lu were studied as representative examples of large, medium, and small Ln3+ ions. A description of the experimental method and complete peak assignment based on polarization resolved measurements is given in the Supporting Information (Section S1.4 and Table S4). The signal at ∼2850 cm–1 corresponds to methylene symmetric stretches (−CH2-ss) on the diaza crown backbone and the alkyl tails (vide infra) of ODA, whereas the peak near 2875 cm–1 corresponds to methyl symmetric (−CH3-ss) stretches from the alkyl tails. The overlapping features at ∼2926 and 2946 cm–1 are assigned to Fermi resonances with unresolved and out of phase contributions from methyl and methylene asymmetric (-as) stretches. (51) The contribution from polarized bulk water molecules in these experiments is small (−OH stretches, >3000 cm–1, Figure 2A), possibly because the acidic picolinate groups are not completely ionized at pH 4. More likely, however, the small water contributions can be explained by the fact that a buffered aqueous phase with moderate ionic strength (0.2 M NaCl) was used in experiments, which screens the surface potential. (52)

Figure 2. Structural characterization of Ln–ODA complexes at the organic/aqueous interface. (A) SFG spectra collected in the SSP polarization combination at pH 4.0. Spectra are offset for clarity. (B) A sketch of the proposed metal-binding conformation of ODA at the oil/aqueous interface. A representative Ln3+ ion is denoted as a rosemary green sphere. Pink arrows represent the measured transition dipoles of −CH2 groups discussed in the text.

From these SFG spectra, a structural picture of ODA at the interface begins to emerge (sketched in Figure 2B). The methylene stretches from hydrophobic tails at a well-packed surface tend to be small for extractants (53,54) and other amphiphiles (55) due to azimuthal averaging in the interfacial plane. This finding is supported by orientational analysis (Figure S19 and Table S5) that shows the average −CH3 tilt angles do not vary in the presence of Ln3+ ions. This lack of change in tilt angles is consistent with the localization of the long tails in the oil phase, which renders them conformationally independent from groups pinned to the interface. As such, the large intensity of the −CH2-ss band is primarily attributed to the methylene groups of the acyclic diaza crown backbone of ODA. Furthermore, this band intensity increases in the presence of Ln3+ ions, signifying structural rearrangements induced by Ln binding. Thus, we propose that the crown backbone of ODA arranges flat at the interface in a pseudocyclic configuration, allowing the hydrophilic ether O atoms to interact with the aqueous phase while enabling the hydrophobic methylene groups to point toward the oil phase. This configuration, we hypothesize, would optimally place the picolinate groups into the aqueous phase. Notably, the SFG spectra do not vary substantially between La3+, Gd3+, and Lu3+. Therefore, although there is a notable Ln-driven change in the pseudocyclic structure of ODA upon binding, the structures formed are largely independent of the identity of the Ln3+ that is coordinated. Taken together, these observations indicate that the interfacial arrangement is important to enable extraction, but in these systems at steady state, the surface does not define the selectivity.

Next, we turned our attention toward probing the nature of the Ln–ODA complexes extracted into the bulk phase, away from the interface, using Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) and 2D IR spectroscopies. These studies were performed on ODA species in TCE after loading the ligand with La3+, Gd3+, or Lu3+ from pH 6.5 MES buffer (Section S1.5 and Table S6 and Figure S20). Figure 3A shows the FTIR spectra of the three Ln3+ complexes, focused on the region from 1560 to 1680 cm–1. Here, two major peaks, centered at ∼1600 and ∼1640 cm–1, are clearly resolved. These peaks are assigned to the C–C and C–N stretching modes of the pyridine rings and asymmetric stretches of the pyridyl carboxylate groups, confirmed by DFT calculations below (Figure S21). Both peaks show characteristic shifts in frequency based on the identity of the Ln3+ ion in solution binding to the carboxylates. The blue shift observed with increasing atomic number is due to the higher charge densities of heavier Ln3+ ions that result in individually stronger bonds. Taken at face value, the FTIR data predict conventional selectivity of ODA for Ln3+ ions, and yet, solvent extraction experiments show the opposite trend. How, then, can ODA form stronger Ln–ligand bonds with small Ln3+, but yet these complexes do not win out thermodynamically in extractions?

Figure 3. Spectroscopic characterization of ODA complexes extracted into the bulk organic phase. (A) FTIR spectra of the carboxylate region taken from different Ln–ODA complexes in TCE, as described in the text. (B) Measured 2D IR spectra from Ln–ODA complexes at two different waiting times, indicated on each plot. (C) Spectral diffusion dynamics extracted from the 2D IR data.

To address this question, we studied the conformational dynamics of the Ln3+–ODA complexes using femtosecond 2D IR measurements, which are plotted in Figure 3B. The details of these measurements can be found in Section S1.5. 2D IR measurements are uniquely capable of separating overlapping spectral responses from isomers, resolving chemical exchange, and mapping ultrafast structural dynamics in complex chemical systems. (56) For instance, the 2D IR spectrum of La3+-loaded ODA exhibits two bands along the diagonal at 1600 and 1640 cm–1, in agreement with the FTIR spectrum. Similar spectral features were observed for Gd– and Lu–ODA complexes; however, two bands near 1640 cm–1 are resolved in the 2D IR spectra. This splitting suggests the presence of different conformers (vide infra), but the lack of cross peaks between them indicates that they do not interconvert on the ps time scale studied here. (56)

The time evolution of a 2D IR spectral line shape reports directly on conformational dynamics by mapping a frequency–frequency correlation function. (40) Considering the 1640 cm–1 bands, we find that for Gd and Lu complexes, the 2D IR line shapes are rounder, whereas the La band is more elongated along the diagonal. The increasing symmetry of the 2D line shape indicates a loss of memory of the initial distribution of vibrational states that were created by the pump pulses at t = 0 fs. This memory is lost through interactions with local chemical environments as measured by a time-delayed probe pulse after a waiting time, Tw, a process known as spectral diffusion. (57,58) To quantify these conformational fluctuations and dynamics, we measured the inverse nodal line slopes (NLS–1) that appear between positive and negative signed features in the 2D IR spectra and plotted them vs Tw in Figure 3C. For Gd3+ and Lu3+ loaded complexes, the NLS–1 decay exponentially with increasing Tw, with time constants of 323 ± 62 and 333 ± 33 fs, respectively. However, for the La3+ loaded complex, the NLS–1 remains almost constant over the experimental window. This lack of change means that the ligand conformation in the La–ODA complex is relatively rigid and invariant over 1.5 ps. By contrast, Gd–ODA and Lu–ODA undergo ultrafast conformational fluctuations around the Ln3+ binding site. This finding can be interpreted as ions “rattling” between binding sites, unable to satisfy all of the would-be coordinating atoms at once due to the small size of heavier Ln3+ ions.

Lastly, to lend support to the conclusions drawn from SFG, FTIR, and 2D IR data, DFT and AIMD simulations probing the structural and energetic differences between the extracted metal–ligand assemblies were carried out. To balance accuracy and computational cost, these studies used a truncated version of ODA, referred to as ODAMe, in which the octadecyl tails are replaced with methyl substituents. Starting from the optimized structure of macropa published previously, (27) the geometries of 32 distinct conformers of ODAMe complexed with La3+, Gd3+, or Lu3+ were optimized at the M06/LC(Ln)/def2TZVPP level of theory. (59) The conformational analysis, which is described in more detail in Section S1.6, reveals a general pseudocyclic arrangement for the core linear scaffold of ODAMe when complexing all three Ln3+, in agreement with SFG data. The lowest energy configuration for La3+ and Gd3+ complexes is Δ(δλλδλ), whereas our calculations predict that the most stable configuration for Lu3+ is Δ(λδλλλ) (Table S7), albeit by only 0.11 kcal/mol. Upon closer inspection of the lowest energy conformers, however, a size-dependent trend can be discerned (Figure S22). Namely, the Δ(δλλδλ) conformation, lowest in energy for La3+, is progressively destabilized across the series by 1.28 kcal/mol. A more significant destabilization is also observed for the second lowest energy conformation of La–ODAMe, Δ(λδδλδ), which increases in energy by 4.5 kcal/mol from La3+ to Lu3+. Although this trend is not as pronounced as that observed for macropa, (27) it nonetheless suggests a possible switch in the conformation of ODA when binding large versus small Ln3+ ions.

A comparison of interatomic distances also shows marked differences between the three complexes with respect to their bonding interactions. As the lanthanide series is traversed, interatomic distances between the metal center and donor atoms are expected to decrease due to the contracting ionic radius of the Ln3+ ion (Table S8). This trend is observed for bonds arising from the picolinate Npy and OCOO donor atoms of the DFT-optimized ODAMe complexes, which decrease by ∼0.16 and 0.18 Å, respectively, from La3+ to Lu3+ (Table S9). By contrast, the interatomic distances between the Ln3+ ion and several O and N donors of the acyclic backbone are nearly invariant across the complexes, signifying a weakening of these bonds with decreasing ionic radius (Table S9). These results suggest that ODAMe cannot effectively contort around the smaller ions, despite its apparent flexibility, thereby limiting interactions with all the coordinating groups on the ligand (Figure 4A).

Figure 4. (A) DFT-optimized structures of the ODAMe complexes with La3+, Gd3+, and Lu3+ ions. Solid lines represent the stronger Ln–O or Ln–N bonds in ODAMe complexes, whereas dashed lines represent the weaker Ln–O and Ln–N bonds in the Gd– and Lu–ODAMe complexes. (B) Variation of the Ln–ligand bond distances (Å) as a function of simulation time, analyzed from the AIMD trajectories for the complexes of ODAMe with La3+ and Lu3+.

These results are reinforced by AIMD simulations, which measure bond distances vs time for the La3+ and Lu3+ complexes of ODAMe (Figure 4B). In agreement with configurationally optimized DFT calculations above, the bond lengths show marked differences between coordination sites on ODAMe but also report on fluctuations in those distances vs time. Specifically, while the Ln–Npy and Ln–OCOO bond lengths in the Lu3+ complex follow the same trend as seen in the case of hydrated metal nitrate complexes, (60) bonds formed between Namine, Oether, and Omethoxy donor atoms and the metal center fluctuated significantly over time. Consequently, these bonds are markedly elongated relative to the bond lengths expected based on ionic radius (Figure S23 and Table S9). This geometric and dynamic analysis suggests that the reverse-size selectivity arises because ODA cannot adjust its structure to effectively complex the smaller ions, highlighting a limited complementarity of the ligand to smaller ions despite the flexibility of its backbone.

This conclusion is further supported by decomposing the relative complexation free energy of forming the La complex with ODA over Gd or Lu with respect to the reference solvated states, as detailed in the Supporting Information (Section S1.6 and eq S5). First, in agreement with extraction trends shown in Figure 1, we confirm that the relative binding free energy, ΔΔGbind (solv), is more favorable for La3+ by 3.6 kcal/mol over Gd3+ and by 9.2 kcal/mol over Lu3+ (Tables 1 and S10). To elucidate the origin of this stabilization for the larger La3+ ion, we partitioned the gas phase contribution of ΔΔEbind (gas), which follows the same trend as the solution phase contribution, into the relative interaction energy between the ligand and the metal ion, ΔΔEint, and the relative strain energy of the ligand, ΔΔEstr.

We find that ΔΔEint is a dominant contribution to ΔΔEbind (gas), with ΔΔEstr playing a secondary role. While we confirm the conventional wisdom (61,62) that a smaller metal ion induces stronger strain on both the ODAMe ligand and the reference solvated Ln(H2O)3(NO3)3 system, as shown in Table S11, the difference in the relative strain energy between the ligand and the reference system for a pair of metal ions is rather small. A positive value of ΔΔEstr indicates that the ODAMe ligand experiences less strain compared to the reference system for Gd3+ or Lu3+ over La3+. This trend would not be generally expected, except when the smaller metal ion fails to strongly interact with all the donor atoms in the ligand, as seen from the DFT calculations and AIMD simulations. As such, the balance between electronic stabilization and strain results in a situation where the thermodynamic selectivity of ODAMe for La3+ is driven by more favorable interaction energies and electronic stabilization throughout the entirety of the complex vs on a per-bond basis.

To better understand how the conformational flexibility of ODAMe impacts Ln3+ coordination, we calculated the relative binding affinities of its parent macrocycle, macropa, for Gd and Lu versus La. Although the overall ΔΔGbind (solv) and ΔΔEbind (gas) values are similar for macropa and ODAMe, we observed notable differences in the individual ΔΔEint and ΔΔEstr contributions between the ligands. The ΔΔEint (gas) component for Gd and Lu is less negative for macropa than for ODAMe (Tables 1 and S14 and S15), indicating that interaction energies are stronger for the macrocyclic macropa chelator in comparison to the flexible ODAMe chelator. This result can be attributed primarily to stronger Gd/Lu–Oether bonds in macropa compared to one of the Gd/Lu–Omethoxy bonds in ODAMe (Tables S9 and S13). This binding strength is compensated, however, by negative ΔΔEstr values for macropa with Gd and Lu, in contrast to the positive values obtained for ODAMe. Thus, with its greater conformational flexibility, ODAMe can more effectively release strain induced by complexation with the smaller Ln3+ ions in comparison to macropa, but at the expense of weakening the interaction with the metal ion center. Macropa, on the other hand, with its more rigid structure, experiences stronger binding interactions but more strain with the smaller Ln3+ ions. Both cases result in large-over-small Ln selectivity for these ligands. These findings highlight how changes in ligand flexibility can influence the balance between electronic stabilization and strain in a coordination complex. A fundamental understanding of these parameters will be beneficial for designing new ligands in the future with enhanced selectivity.

Combining separations, spectroscopic, and computational results, we obtain insight into the interplay of bonding and dynamics in the reverse Ln3+ size selectivity of a new conformationally flexible ligand, ODA. We show that the stability and extraction of Ln3+–ODA complexes depend on the ability of the flexible ligand backbone to wrap around a given Ln3+ to saturate its coordination sphere. For smaller, more charge dense Ln3+ ions, ODA can form some individually stronger bonds (evidenced by FTIR and DFT results) with the metal center, but due to limited complementarity, other bonding interactions are weakened relative to expectations. This weakened coordination results in large conformational fluctuations (2D IR spectral diffusion, AIMD) and poor extraction selectivity at the macroscale. By contrast, individually weaker bonds are formed with the larger, less charge dense La3+ ion. However, due to conformational matching, ODA is better able to coordinate, resulting in complexes with small conformational fluctuations and high thermodynamic stability. This mechanistic framework derived from synthesis, separations, spectroscopy, and theory point to a new paradigm where conformational flexibility is incorporated into ligand design to enable unconventional chemical selectivity.
